[ Music ]
[ Noise ]
>> Regina Meredith: When you
look around at the insanity
of western society lives,
doesn't it begin more
like a cult than a
sustainable lifestyle.
Authority patent would agree.
So, what does it take
to remove ourselves
from that consensus
trance as it's been called
and begin living
in authentic life
that is satisfying
and sustainable.
Terry is with us to
share his strategies
on Spiritual Activism.
Welcome to the show Terry.
>> Terry Patten: Thanks.
Good to be here.
>> Regina Meredith: I
went through you blogs
and that one was
particularly intriguing.
Are you in a cult and one
of things that I was pointed
to was a quote by the Dalai Lama
on what it is to be in a cult.
And I thought it was go
ahead and we'll put this up
and read this because,
sounds like we're all pretty
much living in a cult.
>> Terry Patten: Well, we're
living a crazy way of life
that everyone accepts
and it is unquestioned.
And if you questioned it, your
in threat of being regarded
as outside the main stream and
maybe people would even begin
or your family member
begin to ask, are you--
>> Regina Meredith:
Are you in a cult?
>> Terry Patten:
Getting into a cult,
if you get out of the
cult of this world.
>> Regina Meredith: Well,
let's read the quote
and then see just how-- how
widely it applies to people
in western societies at large.
So, this is a Dalai Lama.
You know you're in a cult if
you, "sacrifice your health
in order to make money.
Then you sacrifice money
to recuperate your health.
Then you're so anxious
about the future,
you don't enjoy the present.
The result being
that you do not leave
in the present or the future.
You leave as if you
are never going to die
and then you die
having never lived."
That sounds like us doesn't it?
>> TP: Exactly.
>> RM: And so, when
you're talking about cult,
you were motivated to write that
particular blog for a reason.
So, what is you definition
of a cult
and what was your inspiration
to go this direction.
>> TP: Well, in this time, we've
got some big bugaboos and taboos
and one of them is
being in a cult.
That's one of the worse things
that you know, you can be.
It's one of the forms
of witchcraft
for which we burn you
know, in PR terms,
we burn those that
defy the norm.
But very often, the people
who are experimenting
with having a teacher or trying
to get together with a group
of people to leave a different
way are trying to break up.
They're trying to wake up
from the-- what Charley Tart,
the neuroscientist called
the consensus trance
which really has to do
with living automatic
unconscious patterns
that are conditioned.
>> RM: In fact, we have
a quote from him too.
I actually wrote it down just
in case you brought Charley up.
I interviewed him the 1980s
around a similar subject as this
when he said, again, "a state
of partly suspended animation,
of stupor, of inability to
function at you maximum level,
dominated by automatic
and conditioned patterns
of perception, thinking,
feeling and behaving."
Is that pretty much
some of that?
>> TP: Exactly.
>> RM: And yeah, go ahead.
>> TP: So, the task of being
a human being in this time
which is really a
very exciting time.
We're the luckiest
people who've ever lived.
We have more wealth, more
mobility, more information,
more opportunity, more comfort,
more ease than anybody has had
in the history of mankind.
We're living better than the
kings and queens of a hundred
or 200 years ago, we're able
to live in most respect.
So, that wondrous bounty
that is on all sides
of this is paradoxical--
paradoxically just opposed
to the fact that there's--
there is such a weight of the
pattern that has as living
as if sleep walking through life
most of the time, and the task
of waking up to really inherit
the full richness of our bounty.
It's really everyone's agenda.
Like to be a human being in
this time to been born in a time
where we're awaken the early
21st century and intending
to grow to awaken,
to take advantage
of the incredible
opportunities that the internet
and that the proliferation of
information, the coming together
of all the great spiritual
traditions of mankind
in conversation with
one another.
To take advantage about that,
it's a matter of waking up.
But then waking up from any idea
you have about what waking up is
into something beyond that.
It's a matter of reawakening
again and again and again,
showing up in each moment.
In a real way, and that
process of really waking
up is it takes you outside
the consensus trance.
And that means breaking a taboo.
Your friends may say, well,
something funny about you
or wait a second, you begin
to get a little lonelier
as you get more awake.
Because you're, you're
living that hurt.
You're beginning to get
out in front of something
and that getting out in
front to something that I,
I hope that this
conservation empowers people
to have more courage to be
more alone and that sense,
alone in awakening that takes
them out of the mass of people
who are tending to live
a condition and kind
of sleep walking
pattern of life.
>> RM: It-- absolutely and when
you do play your self back,
you feel very different
to the people around you.
If you're choosing
to participate
in the moment 100 percent that
means you are engaging almost
in the disciplined
committed way in that moment
in reevaluating each thing
that you're perceiving,
thinking, your reactions.
When people are really
were accustomed
to each other in our auto moods.
You can pretty much almost
predict what your friends
and family are going to
say at, at any given point
in most conversations, right?
>> TP: Yeah, in fact there's
a recent interest neurological
experiment that was done.
There's-- There's a certain
kind of amnesia, certain kind
of aphasia that can take
place neurologically.
And people will suddenly
realize, "Oh, I'm here.
Where am I?"
And they'll start
asking questions.
They'll go through the same
routine again and again
and again each time
that happens.
That is the way we awaken
into the moment to the degree
that we're conditioned
causes us to behave
and almost exactly the
same scripted ways.
That is big trunks of us
are automa-- are automatic.
>> RM: Being operated out
of the subconscious mind.
>> TP: And, and that's OK.
We need to forgive ourselves.
A big part of us
are automatic, OK.
But there's a part of you that
isn't and it's that center,
that conscious center that I'm
interested to speak to because
that part of me really
wants to show up.
It does not want to be
constantly kind of enslaved
by the automaticities.
>> RM: Well, there's a must--
>> TP: And our world needs
that on a brighter scale.
>> RM: Yes.
>> TP: It needs a lot of us to
wake up because what we're doing
in our sleep walking
and specially if walking
into some pretty
serious territory
and we maybe sleep walking
into real catastrophe.
So, what is it for
us reckon with all
of that really responsibly?
Well, that-- that's the
excitement being alive
right now.
We are alive in the most
exciting time in human history.
To sleepwalk through
that is crazy.
If everything you loved,
if everyone you loved were
to be threatened by an intense
evolutionary squeeze point,
you would want to be there.
Well, we're the ones
who've got to be there.
We're here for the family.
Well, what does it take for us
to really be here
for the family?
It's not mindless activism
in a more than it's a kind
of automatic narrow
spirituality.
It's inner work that's
linked to the outer work.
But that inner work requires
us to awaken again and again
and again and again in
every, every moment.
>> RM: But at the same time it
seems that people decide, "Yes,
I-- I want to participate
in some thing."
So, again you start moving
into whatever the message
of that particular endeavor
or point of activism is.
And then you start falling
into the monstrous of that.
>> TP: That's right.
>> RM: And it doesn't
seem to-- it doesn't--
in spite of our best
efforts, this is something
that goes far beyond choosing a
cause even if it's the sustain--
sustenance of our
global ecology.
It's moving beyond the desire to
participate in specific cause.
It doesn't work if we're
not showing up in the way
that you're speaking about--
>> TP: That's right.
>> RM: -- which is reevaluating
each thought, you know,
each interaction, right?
>> TP: Well, there's a choice
in every single moment.
Like, you know the, the great
psychologist Viktor Frankl
who survived the Nazi
death camps looked back
on his experience there.
And he realized that
we have choice even
when we're at our most helpless.
If you're chained to a wall,
if you're being tortured,
you still have a choice whether
to forgive your tormentors
or to hate them.
And the difference between those
two creates a whole different
world even in the most
helpless moment you have choice.
Well, in every moment
you have choice.
Where do you put your attention?
How do you put your attention?
What is you attitude?
What is your feeling energy?
In every moment, you're
tending to become unconscious
so in every moment there's
an opportunity to show up.
>> RM: Wake back up.
>> TP: And become
more conscious.
This is a life of a
practice, a consciousness
in a sense we could
call it yoga.
All of life is yoga, a more
profound yoga of awakening
from bondage to the
stream of thoughts
and reflexive identification
with the skin and
capsulated ego.
But also awakening
into the moment,
into this emergent
moment right now
and in this moment
and in this moment.
This is where the new come in.
Not through something
I already know.
Not through some great wisdom
no matter how great it is.
The repetition of that is
something you know becomes a rat
that that--
>> RM: Exactly.
>> TP: -- that you flow in.
>> RM: Let's talk about
that hypnagogic state
and how we have fallen
into it and--
and what we're most
vulnerable to?
>> TP: Technically, a
hypnagogic state is a, you know,
particular fate of
brainwave pattern
that we're not always
in that technically.
But we are always tending
toward the familiar and that
in the patterning's of,
of our familiar routines,
our familiar thought patterns,
our familiar emotional patterns
and in which where set in motion
by the dynamics of our family
of origin in the way it was
with our mom and our dad
and our brothers and sisters
and the circumstance
of all of that tend--
>> RM: We find our dynamic.
Yeah.
>> TP: They tend to just
be repeating themselves
and no body is completely
free of that.
We all have a certain imprint.
We are all patterned beings,
something wrong with that.
But the way we relate to it,
our relationship to experience,
this is something we have
total choice in relation
to who I really am
is not tarry the--
this body mind in here
experiencing a world out there.
Who I really, really
am at the deepest level
of my being is free
consciousness.
Experiencing this body
and mind, and world
and that's who you are.
That's who each of us really
is, free consciousness.
Free consciousness is infinitely
created, infinitely courageous,
infinitely happy, and
free, and willing.
And that is the place from which
we can re-pattern our world.
We're in a moment in which it's
time to turn a profound corner
and for there to be very rapid
cultural evolution in our world.
This transformation of
human culture is something
that doesn't just
happen by it self.
It's something that's
enacted by real people
like that famous quote from the
anthropologist Margaret Mead,
"Never doubt that a small group
of committed citizens
can't change the world."
In fact nothing else ever has.
>> RM: You're right.
>> TP: It-- It is us the
doing of this is, is--
like if you think about
it as a system sprinter,
we're all now waking
up into the reality
that everything is systemic
and that there are
patterns and meta patterns.
Well, we'd look at the meta
patterns of life on earth
and in this-- this
era, we can kind of see
that there are certain
kinds of responsibilities
that the president of the United
States or the Secretary General
of the United Nations or the
leaders of the major countries
in the free world or the Bill
Gates' sort of the, you know,
the Brad and Angelina's
or you know the,
the rich powerful have.
But they, they have
very limited power also.
They can't just change
the world.
The pattern is going
to have the change in,
in the whole body of it.
There's going to have
to be an awakening.
It isn't just some big
shot somewhere making some
new decision.
The responsibility
and the opportunity
for real choice lives in
the whole body of humanity.
So, conscious individuals in a
relatively privileged society
like probably everyone
hearing these words right now.
We are-- We are a
locust of responsibility.
In fact that there is no
responsibility in that chair,
in this chair and the chair
of each person who's listening
to these words, it is not.
So, what would it be?
What is it right here
and right now for us
to be awaken alive humorous,
self forgiving, other forgiving,
empowered, free, creative enough
to be that change really be,
really imagine of change
beyond what we all ready know.
Not just turn that
into a cliche.
>> RM: And-- which in-- be
the change is bumper sticker.
It has become almost a cliche
without true engagement in it
and that and one of the things
we look at when it comes
to changing, when it comes
to breaking the con--
the, the habit of the way we
think and being in the kind
of quote like status
we are in our lives is
that we're afraid
to go through pain.
There's a vulnerability
involve because if we were--
if for example, I interviewed
Andrew Harvey not long ago
on his Sacred Activism and he
was saying that what we need
to engage with is the thing
that if you were to wake
up at 3 o'clock in the morning
in that vulnerable place
where the veils are
thin, what is the thing
that most breaks your heart?
Most people would rather think
about the laundry list of what's
to do later in the
day then really go
into what breaks our
heart because that level
of engagement makes us
extremely vulnerable.
>> TP: We're dealing with
a lot and a lot of levels.
There are so much
information coming at us.
Supposedly, human knowledge
is doubling every eight
or nine years.
The amount of data
that's coming at us
from all directions is
almost overwhelming.
Finding enough confidence and
clarity to feel like we know
and can see what's really
happening around us.
And then on the basis of that to
show up in our personal lives,
is it that the big paradox here.
We have this incredible
global vision.
We can see things on
this huge enormous scale.
We can imagine universe that's
13.7 billion light years
in size.
You know that that is--
>> RM: And that's just one them.
[ Laughter ]
>> TP: Right.
Right, the scope our imagination
is so great and yet the scope
of our own empowerment
where I'm just
on seven billion on the planet.
You know, that paradox
is enormous
because we're such
feeling beings.
See we're at a root such
passionate caring beings.
And, and so, the-- the
thing that you said
at the beginning is encountered
with discomfort, this core.
When I feel my discomfort
so strongly that I
that I can't get away
from it when I can't be
in a sense comfortable with
a certain level of pain
and discomfort and confusion.
When I, when I become clear
and strong enough that I can be
in this crazy world with my
incomplete understanding,
with my discomfort
and, and still trust,
trust life, trust my self.
That enables me to liberate
the, the range of my capacities
because what we-- our really
reaches capacity has come
from having our fits [phonetic].
We're really on the
ground really rooted.
And knowing the essential loving
nature of our, of our root being
and letting the passion of
our being course through us
and recruit our intelligence.
That fire can jails us
into something so dynamic
and so world changing that
it's that that is what you feel
in Andrew when he's really lit
up in speaking passionately
about the Christ
and the goddess.
These-- This way of being lift
up by our passion arrives really
through free consciousness
being able
to encounter all the limitations
of the personal personality
limited story
and not be destructive from
it's essential character.
And it's the liberation
of that and the liberation
of us together into a
place of contact with being
with one another with the fact
that our world needs us here
and now to be in
enactment of in awakening.
>> RM: And yet, you look
at the younger generation
and it's interesting
they're see--
they seem to be somewhat
in the extremes right now.
You have this incredible
interconnectedness on one level.
And I'm just looking at
how we move this forward
and then we'll go back to
the cult in the moment.
Well, that is kind of a cult.
This technological cult that
the younger people are in--
>> TP: Sure.
>> RM: There is this
transparency.
This incredible
interconnectedness
but at the same time, this
intense face to face kind
of vulnerability in
revelation is reduced to a text,
reduced to even digits.
And so, what is it that
it's going to take to bridge
that generation into coming
into these richness and fullness
of this full expression
face to face
and even vulnerable
with each other?
>> TP: We have to have
the courage to drop
down from our energy
being caught up here.
We have to make that faithful 16
inch journey from head to heart
and even to God and
in our conversations
with our own teenagers and our
conversations with each other.
We have to drop down and admit,
you know, it's hard to be me.
It's hard to be a person.
It's hard to have
all this information
and all this opportunity and not
always know how to acquit it.
I really do feel inspire to,
to make a huge difference
on this planet.
I'm not quite sure how
to do it and I care
and that question is
big and I have to live
in that question and
let it change me.
And that's hard for me and we
can say to our, you know, to--
in the conversation
with the teenager.
We can let our pain in
our humanity and also love
and our vulnerability show.
This is how we break
the cult, the taboo.
There, there a number
of big taboos.
One of them is against
showing you pain.
showing your ecstasy.
One of them is against
showing love in a way
that really makes
you vulnerable.
All of those things
break us out of the cult.
It breaks us out of the
superficial kind of "I'm OK.
You know, how are you?
Fine." What do we
mean we say fine?
I don't think it's appropriate
to really tell you right now.
It's more or less
what we've mean.
We mean, well, you
know I've got that up--
>> RM: Unless I don't
want to engage.
>> TP: I've got enough resources
that I can put a positive span
on it and that should
be good enough.
And it keeps us very distant
and really in personal.
>> RM: Have you done
this in your own life?
>> TP: Absolutely.
>> RM: As an experiment to go
through the day every
time says, "How are you?"
And actually tell to be exactly
how you are in the moment
because that is one way
of breaking the trance.
>> TP: No.
It's a very difficult, it's
a very difficult discipline
because if you really
think about it Regina,
each of those conversations
takes at least 20-30 minutes.
>> RM: I know, even if you gave
the thumbnails sketch you still
have to reveal something
of your self
but I mean I'm sure that'd
be shocking most people
like more information
than I need.
I didn't really mean-- I'm
sorry I asked and all of that.
>> TP: Exactly, exactly.
>> RM: We don't really
day-to-day
to this social intercourse want
to know how each other
are, is in that sense.
>> TP: Well, we-- we often don't
but when we actually
have an encounter
where we really feel the depth
and authenticity and presence
of this feeling human heart,
breathing, caring, beating,
you know, the fact that
we live in this time
in which global warming is
at such a critical point
and weather changes
are so intense
and scientist are telling
us that it so critical
that we actually wake up
and show up right now.
That to be alive in the midst
of that knowing about thousands
of species going extinct,
you know, already.
We're in the midst of the
sixth great extinction.
That hurts and our ability to
feel the pain of the world,
our ability to let that
in and then even to share
that with others,
these are parts
of how we break down the cult.
We become awake not to--
to the pain of that.
We also become awake maybe
if we're lucky to do miracle
of even one moment of embodied
conscious existence the fact
that awareness is
free right here,
right now as me and as you.
>> RM: Well, and as you
talked that incredible force
that we call this
conscious awareness
or love even bringing it in that
course in the sentimental term
but in the broadest
term the compassion
that all embracing universal
term is what Will Tiller,
the physicist William Tiller
calls the universal solvent.
It's what-- is the medium
in which everything
you're talking about,
every effort grows.
>> TP: That's right.
Sometimes awareness is
called the universal solvent.
Sometimes love is called
the universal solvent.
And in the great
spiritual traditions,
the other fulfillment
or free awareness
and the other fulfillment of
love are indistinguishable
if you're fully, fully
loving, you are so awake.
If you're really fully awake,
you are nothing about love.
If you are fully given over to
your love of the great beloved,
the universal beloved who's
always before you no matter
where you look, the
beloved is before us.
If you're awakening all
those ways, you fall open
into a passionate commitment
to the here and now,
because right now
something is necessary.
>> RM: But it requires your
complete authenticity really.
To be fully engage, you
have to be authentic.
>> TP: And-- And to be--
>> RM: And on hide.
>> TP: And to be that authentic,
is to really let it rip.
>> RM: Yes.
>> TP: It is-- There's--
there's a great word
from the ancient Greek,
"parousia" and it means
to tell the truth without
limitation, to take risks
by telling the truth
ruggedly, freely.
Socrates did that.
The kind of truth telling
that's necessary today is rugged
in that essence.
It's a willingness to
breakthrough the veil,
to breakthrough the trance,
to let the luminous white
hot intensity of love
which is living you and
living in me right now
and living everyone right now.
Breakthrough the veil into
presence to waked us up.
>> RM: It might as well because
lies aren't being supported.
I mean, the prevailing
energy surrounds us.
The new paradigm that's
sweeping in really doesn't allow
for that lack of transparency
and those lies might
as well start telling the truth.
And however, what was
that that movement
of few years ago radical
honesty I think it was called
and that was controversial
because it seems
as though there is, was
almost the fine line
where you were causing more
trauma than was necessary
in releasing your truth
which comes from a very hurt
and often traumatize damage
place in our own beings
that we're trying
to contend with.
So, this whole issue about
authenticity and honesty, how--
how is that modulated when
you're looking at trauma
and trapped with in
boom radical honesty?
I'm just going to
say what's true
in another person that's the
recipient that's starts feeling
like a garbage bucket.
>> TP: Well, that-- there are
paradoxes everywhere in turn.
I do a lot of my
teaching in frame.
We call it integral and by
an integral we're basically
meaning, we have to
bring together both poles
of each polarity.
There has to be both
a willingness
to be radically honest,
and a great deal
of sensitivity and kindness--
>> RM: Yes.
>> TP: -- in the way
we perceive the person
to whom we're speaking.
And what it is to be both end.
It's about going from an
either or mind they can see--
when we contrast the
trance to waking up,
it's kind of an either/or
distinction but when it comes
to bringing in the life, you're
always dealing with the paradox
and you're having to
bring together both sides.
That's what integral
consciousness is really about.
As we wake up from the
trance into free awareness,
we're also waking up
into a dynamic and which
where in a world that's evolving
but consciousness has evolved.
Our personal consciousness
and also the collective
consciousness of--
of people, culturally, in our
country and other country.
This culture wars that are being
waged right now are expressions
of cultures in transition who
are uncomfortable with the speed
of change and that's why we're
bumping into one another.
But interiors, interior
experience consciousness
of groups of people
is evolving too.
>> RM: Yes.
>> TP: And that evolution of
culture right now is asking us
to get to a place where we
stop settling for easy answers
or we wake up into the
fact that we have to show
up in the living moment,
this moment in a complex
and paradoxical world in which
there are no easy answers
and which it's there, there
are two truth and they're true
and they're both have to
be taking into account.
In fact there are three or five
or 20 that have to be balanced
and being willing to just keep
breathing open allows surrender
into that this life is a school
and right now everybody who's
really awake is being given the
graduate program, the
post-graduate program.
>> RM: Right, right.
>> TP: It's the, it's
the-- you, you're--
if you're being lived
by that greater force,
you're in the fast lane.
And the fast lane is
blowing our hair back.
It's wild.
But that's what we
were born for.
>> RM: And then around us is a
sound by culture like you say.
It is complex, both
answers can have truth
and we have been conditioned by
media and education and so fort
to look for again the single
simplistic answer to everything
which does not exist
in most cases.
And so, that's a very
good point you make.
And when we're talking about the
notion of then been picking it
up and doing something with it
being comfortable with duality
in terms of truth to
understanding truth,
we'd look at the jacks to
position between kind of well,
more of the Buddhist
way of thought
which is everything
is perfect as it is.
There is that that
school of thought.
Everything is perfect as it is.
And if you look at from a
very, very high point of view,
it's perfect and this is
our creation in the moment.
So, if you take a snapshot,
every moment is perfect
and that is our creation.
>> TP: It's absolutely perfect.
It's radiant.
It's gorgeous.
It's amazing.
I'm so grateful.
So, grateful to be me,
to be here right now
every moment is a gift.
>> RM: And yet at the
same time, we're talking
about participating in
authentic spiritual activism
which means plant your
feet down in reality
and do something about it.
>> TP: Well--
>> RM: And this is, these
are actually two schools
of thought that are--
>> TP: That they have
to both inform us.
>> RM: I agree.
>> TP: If we're not-- if
we're not made humorous
and lighthearted and playful
and courageous and kind of wild
and spunky and empowered by
the perfection of it all.
If that, if that
gratitude doesn't kind of--
>> RM: Enjoy the
craziness of the perfection.
>> TP: And, and then some
sense really able to enjoy it.
But also to be penetrated,
to be--
to see and feel the way in which
we all hurt and to be humble
in the face of complexity that
often outstrips our capacity
to make sense of it all.
And yet-- and yet
to see that it--
that it requires our passionate
commitment and we have
to do our best just because
it so complex doesn't mean
that we should sit back
and only be observers.
There's a lot we can see
in the absorber place.
It's important to
get the big picture.
But it's important for that
big picture to get downloaded
into our responsibility.
We are the global citizenry.
If we don't understand our
responsibility, you know,
there's-- there's a
great statement by,
I think it was Plato.
"Those who are too smart to get
involve in politics are punished
by being governed by those who
are stupider than themselves."
[ Laughter ]
>> RM: Yes.
And we know there-- and there,
there is something to be said
for the quality of each
human being's participation.
And that there are those who
are very good at being quiet
and centered in holding
a very clear space.
That's what their unique
capability on the planet is.
And there are those who
are fired up and need
to become involved
in a very active way.
So, in the sense even
if it's not embodied
with in each individual,
it's still embodied
with in the collective
and they don't have to be
at odds with each other.
Both are needed at this time.
>> TP: Well, there are a lot of
different kinds of leadership.
There are-- there are people
whose day job might be janitor
or personal assistant
to an executive
who have had conversations with
that executive that they serve
where the quiet heroism
and dignity and--
and integrity that
they're bringing
to a very ordinary life
issues has become visible
to that big shot
and has helped give
that individual the
strength to make decisions
that have a affected
the lives of hundreds
or thousands of others.
>> RM: Yes.
>> TP: So, the heroism comes
from a lot of different places.
There are no individuals
who become heroes
completely on their own.
We're all surrounded.
We're social creatures.
We evolved in hundred
gather or advanced.
Our neurology is and our way
of orienting [phonetic] is all
about our connection
to other people.
So, you affect everybody
in your life even two
or three steps we moved.
And so, the-- as you become
clearer and more and more
of a practitioner, as
you awaken more fully
into the divinity
of your humanity.
You kind of let your heart break
and drop into your humanity
and to the ways in which
it hurts to be a lot.
But you also open up into the
divinity of your humanity,
the fact that you are also free.
The things are perfect and
that everything is at stake
and that your action
right now matters.
If this is life for death matter
on the globe and it a life
for death matter even in your
own life how you show up today
so much depends on it.
And yet, things are
perfect as they are.
They wouldn't have happened
if there wasn't that kind
of perfection in them
and being able to be fed
by that to ride that wave.
This is-- this is our
whole lives were we're
in school learning
how to do this.
This is a coon [phonetic] at
deep question that we live with
and that transforms
our consciousness.
So, the fact that we catch
wind of it doesn't exhaust it.
We will deepen in to it for
years and years and years.
Our ability to catch
our concept,
that's just the first
level of it.
Bringing that down into our
breath and body and souls
down into our feet,
that's the work
that really makes
it operational.
>> RM: And yet we shouldn't
feel guilty if we are--
if we find we fall in one
camp more than the other.
And in this-- it would--
this is a world of polarity.
It's a universal polarity.
If we fall into the where we can
drop in, feel the large picture
and sustain a vision that
with feelings, with our love
and passion of a higher nature
of a higher outcome
that's very valuable.
If we find that we can hold
that higher vision but we hurt
and we're upset and
we want to just dig in
and bring all our passion
to the table to help correct
in the trenches which causing
the issue, that's good too.
We don't necessarily
need to embody both
if we're not capable at yet.
In the moment, do what we can.
It's always perfect
to do what we can.
>> TP: Well, we need to have so
much respect for how hard it is,
and how complex it
is to be human being.
>> RM: Yes.
>> TP: And everybody is dealt
such a unique hand
but in universe.
One of the great lessons is
to learn to look at the cards
in your hand including the
ones that don't look so good.
>> RM: Yeah.
>> TP: You know,
an abusive parent
or a tendency toward addiction
or bad skin or something,
you know, that you
would say, "I don't want
that card in my hand."
Well, you've been dealt that
card so that you can learn
to play that hand as
well as it can be played.
>> RM: Exactly.
>> TP: And you can't be
compared to the person
who has dealt a different hand,
and learning to play the cards,
to forgive the cards, to
just say, "OK, this is it,
and my opportunity is to play
these cards as well as I can
until it rises to that."
There so much comparing of
ourselves to the rich and famous
and very gifted individual.
>> RM: Which is most
in illusion?
>> TP: Yes.
>> RM: It's an illusion.
>> TP: It is.
>> RM: I mean one thing
that I think it's important
to understand for all of us is
that if you're rich and famous,
there are skills that you have
probably learned at some point
through your lifetime or
lifetimes even to learn
to say acquire in managing
money in some case,
or to be comfortable in the
lime light in another case.
This is just a skill set.
This doesn't mean
this-- that this is a--
a person that is
necessarily highly advance
in a spiritual way but
we have acknowledge
that those are skill sets
that they have well developed
or they wouldn't be in
the position they are.
And to, I think acknowledge
both is more appropriate
than to either demonize them
or put them on a pedestal.
That's a skill set.
>> TP: It's hard.
It's hard to be rich and famous.
>> RM: Yes.
>> TP: It-- The scrutiny, the
degrees of self-consciousness,
the standards that you
feel obliged to maintain,
it's hard to be a person at
any-- in any configuration.
And we tend all through often to
look at the peculiar limitations
of our lives as if they're
nearly overwhelming.
But when we-- when we can get
that this life is a school
for everybody, and it's a
school for us right now,
and there's a lesson
in this moment
and there's an opportunity
in this moment.
And we get that there's a
grace in the picture that our--
our lives however, difficult
they are have given us an
opportunity to show
up with as much love,
with as much awareness,
with as much presence,
with as much capacity,
much excellence
as we can in each moment.
It's an art you see.
The form of practice,
that-- I teach that.
That's a-- there's
a lot to that.
But art is you showing up and
not matter of you showing up,
it's different in each moment.
In one moment is about opening
in heart, another moment is
about insight, another
moment is moving your body
and bodily service to something
in very practical terms.
It always involves
breaking the mold.
It's like breaking
the social taboo.
You break the kind
of hypnotic table
of your own momentum
and actually show up.
This is-- This is the key.
The cult is about becoming numb.
The cult is about becoming flat,
dead end, beginning to lift--
>> RM: Of an autopilot.
>> TP: Exactly.
>> RM: Yes.
>> TP: And that is tending
to happen in every one of us.
It's-- My teacher
originally would call it the
"self-contraction".
It's the way in which awareness
calls in upon itself and kind
of forgets its nature.
But who it is that
is experiencing this,
the intelligence that sparked
that's inside each moment
in which you can
recognize in a moment.
Just a brief moment.
There is that recognition,
"Oh, yeah, wait."
The brightness itself,
the brightness
of awareness that is free.
That is infinitely created.
That is a source of
courage of the inside.
>> RM: It's what we truly are.
>> TP: It's what we truly are--
>> RM: Yes.
>> TP: -- and it is
the very soul of love.
>> RM: Yes.
>> TP: And you never
ever distant from that.
And that could assert
itself always.
>> RM: Right.
>> TP: And we need to cooperate
with that in the recognition
that that's not just an
inner spiritual journey.
That's the business of
every moment of life.
>> RM: There's a-- there was
a statement made once quite a
while ago by someone I
though was so brilliant.
It was talking about
the presence of the--
what we call the conscious mind
which of course is the least
conscious aspect of ourselves.
And then you have
the subconscious
and super-conscious,
IE, spirit soul,
we can it whatever we like.
And they said, that the
conscious mind was originally
developed to keep you
from bumping into things.
And very simply put
where these other body
of the super-conscious was
the way to live through life
to create, to experience
each other,
but the conscious mind simply
grew into a little beast
that took over and now
we live within that.
And that's where the
subconscious place
out its little programs that
we're stocked in day-to-day.
And I though it was really,
really way to put it enough
that I never forgot that.
It was only there to keep
us from bumping into things.
[ Laughter ]
And now that muscle is so
strong, it's basically--
>> TP: Exactly.
>> RM: -- obliterated
our connection
with the super conscious.
>> TP: Well, there's
another modeling.
There's many ways I'm
talking about this
and these terms are
useful but, you know,
we can use different
terms in another moment.
One of my friends has
made a different--
distinction between
masculine consciousness,
he likes to call it which is
subject object consciousness.
We separate ourselves from
something in order to see,
and feminine consciousness.
This formulation is
just being with what is.
Now, in that way
of looking at it,
we need to be able to do both.
We need to be able to just--
for me to just be with you,
to just contemplate and take
in the humanity and divinity
of your being and just for you
to actually have me
present receiving in.
That's a huge gift.
It's also good if
I can look at you,
understand what you're saying,
compare that with other ideas
make discriminations, response--
>> RM: Absolutely.
>> TP: -- intelligently.
Both have value but it's a
breathing in and breathing out.
We need both of them.
But in our society for
thousands of years now,
the masculine mode
has been rewarded
and the feminine mode has not.
And in that analysis,
we've essentially become
hyper masculine instead
of breathing in and
breathing out.
We're pinned to the
one side of that--
>> RM: Absolutely.
>> TP: -- polarity and only
that hyper masculine
mode gets reinforcement.
And we're all dealing--
you might say the
symptoms of the disease
of that hyper masculine fixation
to simply allow ourselves to be
with ourselves, to be
with our own experience,
to be with our loved ones,
to take in his breath,
to take in the miracle of this
moment, to take in the beauty
of your smile, to
actually feel the heart
that is always present.
>> RM: Yes.
OK. Now, let's go into the
unhealthy aspect of activism
and you call it anxiety
produced activism.
What does that mean?
It's where we're not-- where
you were just a moment ago.
We're not breathing in
and we're not breathing
out in this wonderful flow
between the two aspects mind.
Instead, we seem to have gotten
stocked into something else.
So, what is anxiety
produced activism?
>> TP: Most of the activism that
you all are aware of that we see
on the TV everyday,
most of the marches,
most of the impassioning
speeches, most of the protests,
most of the political action
committees, most of the NGOs
that are celebrating a cause
are tending to buy the dilemma.,
the problem that the--
and there's a place where we
get very over up [phonetic].
We believe the problem
so strongly
that that becomes a dominating
thing shaping our consciousness.
An activism based on that
recreates its premise.
>> RM: Yes, reinforces the
same [multiple speaker].
>> TP: When we bring that
unhappiness, that anxiety
that it's a victim
psychology very often.
You know, the problem with
victim psychology is when I fell
like I am the victim
of other things.
I'm focusing on everybody
else's power
and I don't think I
have any as the victim.
Well, in so many of these
dynamic, we're buying that.
As activists, we're buying
into that kind of psychology.
You have to make that move
from victim to creator.
We are created.
Even if there are
many, many factors
that victimize people
and there are.
And people deserve
compassion, and care.
But we all need to find our way
to our places creators
not just as victims.
And our way of active--
actively engaging the world
in sacred bases has to be
basically lit by the joy
of our communion with the source
of life which is always present.
I had a big moment.
I was raised to be an
activist actually, Regina.
I was raised in a-- in a racial
community back in the 60s.
I came of age when the Vietnam
War thing was still going on.
I marched.
I led. I remember leading
a crowed of 3,000 students
to march around President
Fleming's home at the University
of Michigan and Ann Arbor,
and we were wanting them
to divest their investments
in South Africa.
And at certain point I saw
this window open up and--
well, I saw an open
window begin to close.
So, a woman's arm reached over
and I could see her
face, and I could see.
She was just feeling
threatened and anxious,
and she pulled the drape
as we were marching
around for home--
probably, his wife.
And I realized that I didn't
really know how much power he
had over the investments
of the university.
I didn't know the
circumstance of her life.
And I as a pretty
arrogant adolescent though
that I had a righteous basis for
kind of tormenting this woman.
But in the-- just a human
confrontation of me marching
around the home and
seeing her that,
and I've gotten everybody
to march on his own.
>> RM: Right.
>> TP: I actually done it.
>> TP: So, I knew-- and I knew
that I was an arrogant
adolescent punk
that I hadn't taken
at all into account.
And that if there was
going to be a revolution
that was really going to change
things, it had to begin with me.
>> RM: So, how would you
have reframed that with--
from a mature perspective?
>> TP: Well--
>> RM: The same--
let's put yourself back
in that situation
and reframe it.
What would you have done from
where you-- what you know now.
>> TP: You know, it's funny.
I don't tend to think that way.
Let's me see if I can play
with that thought experiment.
I think-- I think that in
the, you know, in reality,
I think everything was
perfect that the best thing
that could have happened
is what happened.
We did what did, she
had the confrontation.
The president had the
confrontation and the board
of regents or whoever decided
on their investments realized
that the poor guy was out
there in the front line--
>> RM: Yeah.
>> TP: -- and they
had to deal with it.
And I have the insight I had.
And my life is going
on the very best.
>> RM: Right.
>> TP: It's all perfect.
>> RM: Yes.
>> TP: But certainly
now, I'm interested
in the different kinds of
activism in which people engage
with one another in a way that's
profoundly deep spiritually
and intimately which the inner
work is really being done
and the outer work is
connected to that in a work.
In which we really
endeavor to walk our talk.
We never had the arrogance
of thinking we're
perfectly walking our talk.
We always have to walk
it better and better.
And there's a process
of becoming more spiritualized
beings who are also engaged
in the world, who have a
responsibility at the level
of the transformation
of the world
that even has a political
dimension.
But much of our activism
can be in a form
of creating the technologies,
or creating new communications
tools,
or even creating
the kinds of art,
or changing the way
the spirituality is in,
there are thousands and
thousands and thousands of ways
that we can create the elements.
You might call them
the spare parts out of
which we can build a new society
in which this species can live
in a sustainable
relationship to the earth
in which we can have real
opportunity and justice
for everybody on the planet,
in which life can be spiritually
fulfilling for everybody.
We're building the spare parts
in our projects right now.
And yeah, you know,
there will be calamities.
There will be crises.
And during some of those crises,
windows of opportunities
will open
up for more fundamental
systems redesigned.
And some of us need
to be thinking
with great foresight
about all of that.
So, there are so many creative
projects we can be undertaking.
But the way I look at it,
it's a three-part strategy.
You know, in the
Ancient Chinese pattern
that there was a sage
advising the emperor.
Well, one of the
great Chinese ages
that we all remember
the name of Bodhidharma,
the guy with the big eyebrows.
Well, first we need
to become Bodhidharma.
We need-- We need to awaken.
Then we need to do
all the things.
We need-- We need to come
up with all the solutions,
all the millions of
forms of activism
that I was just referring to.
>> RM: In collaboration.
>> TP: And-- and-- and-- and
gain the ear of the emperor.
That is we need to change
our relationship to power.
It isn't enough to
speak truth to power.
We have to actually
begin to be willing
to take responsibility
for this world.
When you awaken in this world,
you begin to realize that you're
in a great room with
many, many children.
As you awaken, it's
like becoming an adult.
This human species is
going to its adolescence.
And as you begin to become an
awaked adult, you look around
and you see that,
these kids they have--
they don't just have guns,
they have ridiculously
powerful weapons.
They're actually raping
and killing one another.
This is a map, and you look
around as an adult for the eyes
of other adults, other clear
eyes that see what you see.
And those eyes meet,
you realize, "Oh,
we adults have a
responsibility to do
to bring order to this room."
We need to take care
of the kids.
We need to find a way to
separate them from their weapons
and turn this into a place
where they can finish
growing up and thrive.
>> RM: And it's interesting
because it--
well, as you were talking when
you were young during the 60s,
70s, there was a spirit and
even astrologically plotted
so to speak.
A spirit of revolution that
comes around cyclically.
A very similar kind of
astrological confluence
of events is happening
right now.
But you're-- but you're just--
you just said is now we
address it in a more mature way
and we address it perhaps more
with the influence of the heart
than just confrontation as
we did a few decades ago.
>> TP: Yeah.
>> RM: And you, in fact,
this is a nice little segway.
And I love what you just said.
You actually work
with Heartmath.
And so, I would like to know
some of what you learned
about that connection that
heart-brain connection
and its place in our world even
through activism if you want
to run it through
that lens [phonetic].
>> TP: Well, you know,
the way that I teach now--
with Heartmath, what I did
is I was the Project Manager
for the development of
their first Heart Rate
Variability Monitor.
As we call it the freeze-framer.
Now, I think they call
it the MYF [phonetic].
And it was-- it was
wonderful to work with them
because they understood
some very,
very important basic things.
The way in which
appreciation and care,
very simple basic hard emotions.
We regulated our system
and create coherence.
And their core to the
way I teach now, you--
when we talked earlier,
I mentioned to you
that I use five M words
to describe the form
of the practice that I teach;
mornings, moments, mission,
milestones, and momentum.
By mornings, I mean a
daily practice of movement
and stillness meditation.
By moments, I mean waking
up and doing variety
of different practices but
the practice that you do
in a moment in the
midst of life.
And I was referring
to that a lot earlier
in this conversation.
Basically, many forms of
spiritual practice forget
to talk about how
it has to happen
in brief moments many
times all day long.
Our whole life needs
to be our practice
and some moment says core.
Mission has to do with how
the uniqueness of you relates
to some larger service
that you're here to do
and really understanding that
so you know the true north
by which to navigate.
Milestones are your projects
like this show is a
milestones practice
for you creating it each day.
If you relate to your milestones
practice in three ways,
it becomes really
self transcending.
One of them is, I'm
doing it in service
to something greater
than myself.
Two is, I'm co-creating
it with a power greater
than my own creature power.
And three is, I'm doing
it with willingness
for it to transform me.
May the one who completes
this project be different
than the one who began it.
That's your milestones practice.
And then by momentum, I actually
mean all of the other practices
that are part of life
that I kind of wrote
about with Ken Wilber in the
book "Integral Life Practice".
So that includes all the spheres
of our life, our body practices
with which could be, you know,
running and biking and hiking
and all of the things that we
do for our physical fitness,
our diet, all of
those body practices,
their spiritual practices,
our meditative practices.
There're mind practices, study,
the audios, and shows like this
that clarify our
mental understanding.
There's our psychological
work, our shadow work,
our development of our souls.
There's our interpersonal
practice in our intimacies
and with our family, and also
in our public relationships
at work and as citizens.
So, all those are spheres
and there's an integral cross
training among them that is
when you're breaking up
stockiness in your body
and you're breaking up
stockiness on the cushion,
you grow in both more quickly.
People who take up
weight lifting,
actually progress faster
in their meditation
practice then people
who don't oddly enough--
>> RM: Interesting.
>> TP: -- when you
look at the study.
>> RM: Yeah.
>> TP: So, that principle of
integral cross training is a key
to the way I teach too.
>> RM: Interesting.
Yes, it's holistic.
In the big picture-- there
was one thing I wanted
to get your take on before
we leave the whole subject
of Heartmath behind.
It was-- and we talked
about this off camera
that what had intrigued you most
and you found very validating--
>> TP: Yeah.
>> RM: Yes, is that oftentimes--
please explained
these phenomena.
>> TP: Yeah, well, there's some
wonderful research that roll
and some of the other scientist
that Heartmath did having
to do with-- doing
very, very fine tests
of when the physiology of
human beings registers events.
And they discovered
that the first system
that registers choices
and senses things is actually
the neurocardiology even before
the brain that--
>> RM: Yes.
>> TP: -- our first
perception is hear not here.
But even more interestingly,
there are many things
that are anticipated, that is
before the event takes place is
registered here, that is
we actually are psychic
that there is-- there is
anticipatory awareness.
And one of the things
that is important for us
to understand is the reason
that everybody is
feeling like, "Whoa!
This is game time.
This is," you know, if I've
becoming more conscious all my
life, this is the time
to bring it into action
that the sense that
now is the time.
Other ages thought they--
that they were living
in a time that was it.
No, they were wrong.
This is it.
That sense is something
that we're--
I think we're all getting
in anticipation of something
that we're being called forth
in the service right now.
Our hearts, our sensing
mechanisms are sensing something
that hasn't even happened yet
and we're all kind of it's
like the triad is gathering to
do the work we're meant to do.
>> RM: Yes, and it
creates a sense
of anticipation on one hand.
In some people, it
produces a sense of anxiety
because we're already
catching the future wave.
And I was in an experiment
that was conducted
by Dean Regan [assumed spelling]
at one point in a
group of people.
And one of his colleagues
was there.
I think they may have
been conducting it.
And it was a very simple one.
An image is going to pop-up one
side of the screen or the other,
and you are to click your answer
right or left before it appears.
And that particular group of
people was amazing the accuracy
with which some people are
up to 80, 85, even 90 percent
in their accuracy of where
the image was going to appear.
And again, this thing
you're talking about,
it's the heart that's
intercepting
that pre-information first.
And so, to understand what you
just said, we are all psychic,
all of us are beginning
to feel this.
Doesn't that mean
that we have to engage
in a very real authentic loving
way with whether it's anxiety
or anticipation and maybe
ask some deeper questions?
Maybe like those coons you
were talking about earlier.
>> TP: Yeah.
Well, first of all we-- the
first thing that is required
in order to cope well in
anxiety is to not make it wrong.
We've got to just allow
that anxiety to be there
and become curious and self
compassionate in relation to it.
It will transform but it will
only transform if it's welcomed,
if we're friendly, if
we in words of rooming.
>> RM: Is therefore--
>> TP: We've would greet at
the door laughing, you know.
>> RM: Yes.
It's there for a reason.
>> TP: It is there for a reason.
>> RM: It's trying
to get our attention
for a reason that
knows something.
>> TP: Exactly.
So, this is-- that that's key
and then let's though face it
that anxiety is building
and that sense
of anticipation is building
because we're facing
such profound questions.
How can this globally
interconnected world
with all the systems that we
have which many of which are
in crises which seemed
to be in a stuck place.
We're all kind of
sleepwalking into what seems
like it maybe a disaster
with global warming,
and mass extinctions, and
strange weather events,
and crop failures, and
breakdowns of financial
and educational, and
so many different kinds
of institutions, you know.
That is a question
that we're all facing.
It's an impossible
question that is growing us
like Rilca [assumed spelling]
wrote to the young poet,
"Love the questions, live
the questions let them
transform you."
That's what a Rinzai monk does
when he can't make his
way through his coon.
He lets the coon
transform his consciousness.
We have a big question,
all of us,
millions of us are
facing this big question.
It's going to take all
of us responding to it
as practitioners and letting
that coon change
our consciousness.
That is how we wake up and
it's how we draw something new
out of the Noah script,
how we let the Noetic
evolution take place.
Cultural and consciousness
evolution will take place
by us very intensively
becoming the nerve endings
in the global bring that
draw the lightning strikes
of that strange attractor of
a higher order that's wanting
to find its way into form.
>> RM: Allow ourselves to be
that antenna whether it's
comfortable or uncomfortable
and then start digging
for its truth.
>> TP: And it will be both
ecstatic and uncomfortable --
>> RM: Yes.
>> TP: -- for sure.
>> RM: Yes, well put.
Thank you so much for your time.
I appreciate you being here.
If you'd like to connect more
deeply with Terry's work,
you can go to his
website at Terry Patten,
that's P-A-T-T-E-N.com.
For more on Sacred
Activism, you might also want
to watch my interviews
with Andrew Harvey here
in Gaiam TV Archives.
Until next time, thank you for
joining us here on Gaiam TV.
[ Music ]
[ Silence ]